Day 1: Introduction to Databases and Basic Commands
We kicked off by exploring fundamental SQL commands to manage databases and tables:

SHOW DATABASES: Lists all databases.
CREATE DATABASE techforallwithnikhil: Creates a new database.
USE techforallwithnikhil: Switches to the database.
CREATE TABLE employee: We created a simple employee table with columns like FirstName, LastName, Age, and Salary.

Sample Query:

INSERT INTO employee(FirstName, LastName, Age, Salary, Location)
VALUES ("NIKHIL", "NEGI", 21, 1500, "Delhi");
Some key data types covered were:

INT: Integer values
VARCHAR: Variable-length strings
TIMESTAMP: Date and time values

By the end of Day 1, we learned how to insert data, query data using SELECT *, filter data with WHERE, and even update or delete specific records.

Day 2: Working with Multiple Tables
On Day 2, we advanced by creating a courses table and a learners table, which demonstrates how to handle relationships between tables using foreign keys.

CREATE TABLE courses: Created a courses table with course information such as CourseName, CourseDurationMonths, and CourseFee.
CREATE TABLE learners: Introduced foreign key constraints, linking the learners table to courses. This helped us understand how to model relationships between entities in databases.

We inserted some records into the learners table and wrote queries to retrieve records using joins. We also learned how to aggregate data using functions like COUNT(), MAX(), MIN(), and SUM().

Aggregation Example:

SELECT COUNT(*) as num_of_enrollments
FROM learners;
Day 3: Grouping and Filtering Data
Day 3 was all about data analysis! We learned how to group data using the GROUP BY clause and filter results with HAVING.

GROUP BY: Helped us find insights such as the number of learners who joined courses via LinkedIn, YouTube, or other sources.

Example Query:

SELECT SourceOfJoining, COUNT(*) as num_of_students
FROM learners
GROUP BY SourceOfJoining;
This session also introduced logical operators like AND, OR, and NOT, which are crucial for creating more complex queries and conditions.

Day 4: Advanced Querying Techniques
On Day 4, we focused on performing advanced queries like:

BETWEEN: Filtering records based on a range of values (e.g., finding learners with years of experience between 1 and 3).
ALTER TABLE: Modifying the structure of tables. We learned how to add, modify, or drop columns and constraints dynamically.

Example:

ALTER TABLE employee ADD COLUMN JobPosition varchar(50);
We also touched on DELETE vs TRUNCATE commands. While DELETE removes individual records, TRUNCATE quickly clears an entire table.

Day 5: Subqueries and Joins
On Day 5, we explored subqueries and different types of joins (INNER, LEFT, RIGHT, FULL). Joins allow us to combine data from multiple tables based on related columns.

Subquery Example:

SELECT * FROM employee
WHERE Salary > (SELECT AVG(Salary) FROM employee);
Day 6: Indexing and Performance Optimization
Day 6 was all about optimizing queries. We explored:

Indexes: How indexing helps speed up queries, especially when dealing with large datasets.
EXPLAIN: Used to analyze query performance and identify bottlenecks.

Day 7: Backup, Restore, and Data Security
On the final day, we discussed data backup strategies to ensure data safety:

BACKUP DATABASE: Commands to back up your database for disaster recovery.
GRANT and REVOKE: Managing user permissions to ensure data security.

Final Thoughts
Completing this 7-day MySQL bootcamp has given me a solid foundation in relational database management. Huge thanks to my mentor, Priya Bhatia , for making the learning process seamless and insightful. SQL is a powerful tool, and mastering it opens doors to various career opportunities, whether in data analysis, software development, or database administration.

I highly recommend anyone interested in working with databases to start learning MySQL. It’s one of the most widely used database systems and provides a strong base for learning other SQL-based systems like PostgreSQL or Microsoft SQL Server.
